Treatment of dissociative disorders usually consists of psychotherapy (talk therapy) to help you gain control over the dissociative process and symptoms.

Psychotherapy takes place with a trained, licensed mental health professional, such as a psychologist or psychiatrist. It can provide support, education and guidance to you and/or your family to help you function better and increase your well-being.

Specific types of psychotherapy commonly used for dissociative disorders include:

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT): This is a structured, goal-oriented type of psychotherapy. Your therapist or psychologist helps you take a close look at your thoughts and emotions. Through CBT, you can unlearn negative thoughts and behaviors and learn to adopt healthier thinking patterns and habits.
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT): DBT is specially adapted for people who experience emotions very intensely. The main goal is to strike a balance between validation (acceptance) of who you are and your challenges and the benefits of change. Your therapist will help you learn new skills to improve emotion regulation.
Therapy can be difficult, as it involves remembering and learning to deal with past trauma. But it can significantly help your symptoms in the long term.

Other therapies that can help include:

Hypnosis: Hypnosis (hypnotherapy) is a state of deep relaxation and focused concentration. When you’re under hypnosis, this intense level of concentration and focus allows you to ignore ordinary distractions and be more open to guided suggestions to make changes to improve your health.
EMDR therapy: Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) therapy involves moving your eyes a specific way while you process traumatic memories. EMDR’s goal is to help you heal from trauma or other distressing life experiences. Compared to other therapy methods, EMDR is relatively new.
No specific medications treat dissociative disorders. But your provider may recommend certain medications, such as antidepressants, to treat co-occurring mental health conditions.