Treatment programs for co-occurring disorders may be either residential, where the person lives on site for a period of time, or outpatient, where the person attends treatment for some portion of the day and goes home at night.

Inpatient or residential programs often consist of individual and group therapy, some level of medical care, supplemental/alternative therapies such as art therapy or meditation, and 12-step meetings. Residents also participate in activities together such as movie nights or outdoor recreation.

Outpatient programs can vary in their structure. Partial hospitalization programs are similar to residential programs in structure and schedule during the day, with the main difference being that the person returns home each night. More flexible outpatient programs can be structured to fit a person’s existing schedule and life obligations.

The intensity and duration of symptoms, potential severity of a person’s dependence on a psychoactive substance, and other factors such as physical health dictate what type of treatment program would be best. For example, some people may require a period of detox before they begin treatment. Detox is sometimes available at inpatient/residential programs but can also be done in standalone facilities or hospitals.

In the case of co-occurring disorders, integrated treatment is considered superior when compared to separate treatment for each disorder.9 This type of treatment takes both disorders into account.

Impulse control disorders and drug or alcohol addiction may be treated with a variety of therapies within a treatment program.9

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a widely used form of therapy that helps individuals to learn how to modify potentially detrimental thought patterns and behaviors.
Dialectical behavior therapy helps people control self-harm behaviors such as suicidal attempts, thoughts, or urges, as well as drug use.
Contingency management offers rewards for engaging in healthy behaviors or avoiding unhealthy behaviors such as drug use.
Therapy can take place in an individual, group, or family setting. For parents of adolescents or children with impulse control disorders, treatment may also include working with the parents on how to respond to their child’s behaviors in a positive manner