The most common treatment plan for OCD involves psychotherapy (talk therapy) and medication.

If this treatment doesn’t help your OCD symptoms and your symptoms are severe, your provider may recommend transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).

Psychotherapy for OCD
Psychotherapy, also called talk therapy, is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help you identify and change unhealthy emotions, thoughts and behaviors. You work with a mental health professional, such as a psychologist.

There are several types of psychotherapy. The most common and effective forms for treating OCD include:

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT): During CBT, a therapist will help you examine and understand your thoughts and emotions. Over several sessions, CBT can help alter harmful thoughts and stop negative habits, perhaps replacing them with healthier ways to cope.
Exposure and response prevention (ERP): ERP is a type of CBT. During ERP, a therapist exposes you to your feared situations or images and has you resist the urge to perform a compulsion. For example, your therapist may ask you to touch dirty objects but then stop you from washing your hands. By staying in a feared situation without anything negative happening, you learn that your anxious thoughts are just thoughts and not necessarily reality.
Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT): ACT helps you learn to accept obsessive thoughts as just thoughts, taking the power away from them. An ACT therapist will help you learn to live a meaningful life despite your OCD symptoms.
Mindfulness techniques such as meditation and relaxation can also help with symptoms.

Medication for OCD
Medications called serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs), selective SRIs (SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants may help treat OCD.

Healthcare providers most often recommend SSRIs for OCD and prescribe them at much higher doses than they do for anxiety or depression. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved SSRIs include:

Fluoxetine.
Fluvoxamine.
Paroxetine.
Sertraline.
It may take up to eight to 12 weeks for these medications to start working.