Schizophrenia isn’t curable, but it is often treatable. In a small percentage of cases, people can recover from schizophrenia entirely. However, this isn’t a cure because there isn’t a way of knowing who will have a relapse of this condition and who won’t. Because of that, experts consider those who recover from this condition “in remission.”

Treating schizophrenia usually involves a combination of medication, therapy and self-management techniques. While therapy alone is often effective for treating most mental health conditions, managing schizophrenia usually requires medication. Early diagnosis and treatment are important because they increase the chances of a better outcome.

What medications or treatments are used?
Treating schizophrenia and related conditions typically involves multiple methods. Those methods can happen in combinations or steps.

Medications
There are two main types of medications that treat schizophrenia.

Typical antipsychotics. Also known as first-generation antipsychotics, these medications block how your brain uses dopamine, a chemical your brain uses for cell-to-cell communication.
Atypical antipsychotics. These medications, also called second-generation antipsychotics, work differently from first-generation antipsychotics. These block both dopamine and serotonin, two key communication chemicals in your brain. Clozapine is a particularly effective medication that can treat symptoms of schizophrenia when other drugs don’t work. However, it has a rare serious side effect that requires frequent blood monitoring to keep people safe, which is why healthcare providers usually recommend other antipsychotics first.
There are other medications your healthcare provider might also prescribe to treat other symptoms that happen alongside or because of your schizophrenia symptoms. They might also prescribe medications to help reduce side effects of antipsychotic medications such as tremors.

In general, your healthcare provider is the best person to talk to about the medications they might prescribe. They can give you more specific information related to your specific situation, including your life circumstances, medical history and personal preferences.

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy methods like cognitive behavioral therapy can help people with schizophrenia cope with and manage their condition. Long-term therapy can also help with secondary problems alongside schizophrenia, such as anxiety, depression or substance use issues.

Another key way therapy helps is with treatment adherence. As mentioned above, people with schizophrenia often don’t understand or recognize their symptoms, so they feel like they don’t need treatment. People with schizophrenia who continue therapy are more likely to follow treatment plans and guidance from their healthcare providers.

Other therapy methods that might help include art therapy and drama therapy, which can aid with loss of motivation and a person’s ability to recognize their symptoms. Healthcare providers might also recommend techniques that focus on helping with social skills, setting up self-care routines and more.

Electroconvulsive therapy
In cases where a person’s schizophrenia doesn’t improve after trying certain medications, and the person is at-risk for self-harm or harming others, healthcare providers might recommend adding electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). This treatment can bring rapid improvements when medication alone will take too long to have an effect.

When other treatments don’t work, ECT is often the only one that will, and it can be lifesaving when people are at high risk of suicide. Despite this, ECT use isn’t common because it carries a heavy stigma and because TV, movies and other media are rarely accurate in showing how this treatment happens.

This treatment involves using an electrical current applied to your scalp, stimulating certain parts of your brain. That stimulation causes a brief seizure, which can help improve brain function for people with severe depression, agitation and other problems. People who receive ECT receive anesthesia, so they’re asleep when this procedure happens and it isn’t painful.